---
layout: post
title: "Keith Devlin and IBL"
description: "Just before starting the course - Introduction to mathematical thinking"
category:
tags: [maths]
---
{% include JB/setup %}

# Importance of thinking

It's very important to have a creative thinking process in today's
world. Humans have evolved into complex animals from thousands of
years of fortunate evolution. Just because we can think we have won
the race of all living beings, even though we are exponentially weak
in comparison to some of the animals (imagine tiger, elephant,
etc.). Had it not been our complex brain, we might have got
extinguished from the list of living species in this world today. To
continue our journey as a successfull animal, we must keep thinking
and evolve our brain in the right direction always.

# Introduction to Mathematical thinking

Keith Delvin has made this awesome course available for free on
coursera and I can't explain how much just watching the introduction
part of the course has influenced and affected me. We have been taught
to think traditionally - learning some bunch of techniques to solve
problems and think of pre-learned templates when we look at a new
problem. This is not the way you approach complex, real-world
problems. You are supposed to think out-of-the-box while this
traditional approach taught in the school encourages inside-the-box
thinking.

# Inquiry-based learning (IBL)

It's a technique devised by Moore where students are encouraged to ask
questions and immerse themselves in the content of the course instead
of just listening the lecture. Students are encouraged to interact in
the lecture classes and think on their own rather than follow the
lecturer's thinking. That's what the 'Introduction to Mathematical
thinking' course would be following which actually is quite new to
me. Here's the [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f6t6WiWYdgY)
that I found really inspiring.

# How great mathematician think

Here's another great [video](https://vimeo.com/106761324) where Keith
Delvin tells how he approaches a problem. Importance of physical
activity is emphasised - it's important to allow your brain to absorb
the abstract mathematical problem you have already spent weeks. And
it's quite likely that you then solve the problem in your
sub-conscious. This is how the brain develops.

# How to Procrastinate

Some really helpful advice given by Keith here on how to
procrastinate. According to him, you procrastinate when you are
switching between the tasks. Once you are on to doing something, you
can go pretty well. The problem comes when you are switching it.
